Science Fair 2025-2026

Within QEC, there are many methods of error correction; the most classic and widely implemented is surface codes coupled with erasure and wavefunction decoders. However, surface codes, erasure, and wavefunction decoders are not able to reliably account for certain errors, such as amplitude-damping errors. Amplitude damping errors are errors for which the state of a qubit changes from either a |1> to a |0> or a |0> to a |1>, where |state> is Dirac notation for the qubit's state. Specifically, since erasure accounts for data that goes missing, it is unable to track state loss/decay. 

An idea that could combat this issue is to have some sort of tracking system within the hardware of the computer, where it can detect the loss or gain of energy in the system. This would mean that amplitude-damping errors occur due to an imperfect closed system allowing the “osmosis” of energy depending on the outside environment. Since the hardware cannot always be designed perfectly to create an ideal system, additional hardware can be applied to detect changes in energy within the system, resulting in a flag being raised.

Specifically, what could be tested is the possibility of this hardware. Since it hasn’t been designed or prototyped (to my knowledge), it is not possible to test its feasibility as a true QEC method that can be added onto existing codes and erasure systems. However, one can test its possible improvement through simulations.

Quantum computing simulation software is widely accessible on the internet, and the software is the true restriction of the testing that could be done with a proper setup. For example, certain simulators (and quantum mechanics for a while) were restricted to operating within Hilbert space. Hilbert Space is a limitation on density matrices, resulting in the inability to mathematically work with density matrices greater than 2 by 2. This is important due to erasure, a method of QEC using 3x3 density matrices to accurately conserve probability (mathematically), meaning that math must be in violation to create erasure flags and operate in more difficult methods. 

By using certain decoders called stabilizer-formalism simulator, which are not restricted to Hilbert Space, a simulation can be designed using erasure flags (or a non-stabilizer-formalism simulator can use ancillas to act as pseudo-surface codes) and simulated amplitude dampening can be tracked using 2 decoders, one a general wavefunction decoder and another a wavefunction decoder fed with “corrected data”, data that had been eliminated or processed based on the hardware’s input, either through a majority vote or a smaller wavefunction decoder or another alternative. By stacking additional methods of error correction, the experiment would be able to find the predicted improvement in fidelity (a measure of accuracy in quantum systems) through further data processing. 

